Date: 2013-09-30T09:30

# Subconscious Life Lessons: My (white, male) narrative is more important than yours

<figure>
  ![My mind is split in two: Research psychologist Jonathan Haidt describes the mind as a small rider, the concious, sitting on a giant elephant, the unconscious. The rider thinks he is in charge and can tell the elephant where to go, but the elephant has his own ideas. THE RIDER CANNOT FORCE THE ELEPHANT INTO A DIRECTION, BUT CAN TRAIN HIM SLOWLY OVER TIME. If the rider and the elephant work as a team—when the conscious and the unconscious are close—my life is going to be rich.](https://draftin.com:443/images/1721?token=b_xH0R8O7hgLXCcpnQH86yyuZlANa9qmdHMFHRiwtihjvBO0dTOCFSBSaCdoSvkB4_eFXJnyyT6S2HrfDeq6Hlg)
  <figcaption>
  Image from [The Happy Show]; a phenomenal exhibit by [Stefan Sagmeister]
  </figcaption>
</figure>

  [The Happy Show]: http://icaphila.org/exhibitions/happyshow.php
  [Stefan Sagmeister]: http://www.sagmeisterwalsh.com/

Confession time.

As a child, my brother Seth and I would often go visit some friends, Sarah and
Chelsea, and play at their house. One of our favorite games was Cowboys and
Indians.

A description for the unfamiliar: Cowboys and Indians is a improve-based
role-playing game built around common American Western motifs. At the beginning
of a game, one of the participants suggests a basic storyline, and everyone
debates it into a shape they all agree to.

I'm sure we played this game many times, but one rough storyline I remember is
this: Seth and I were cowboys, and we somehow ended up with Sarah and Chelsea,
who were Indians, as captives in our camp. (Let's for now avoid pondering the
troubling means by which they may have ended up being captured.) The rest of
the story was going to be that, though in the beginning we do not trust these
wily Indian women, we eventually fall in love with them. THE END. We all live
happily ever after or something. (Falling in love is the end of the story,
dontcha know?)

(In hindsight, every bit of this is terrible. The general cultural
insensitivity of the game; the assured violence that led to the aforementioned
captivity (instigated by which people group, the cowboys or the Indians? I
honestly don't remember. Which would be more historically accurate? I don't
think we asked such questions.) Also, the fact that we were utterly oblivious
to how significant and devastating it would be for an indigenous woman to leave
her entire cultural heritage behind and join with the people who, in large
part, destroyed that culture.)

I remember thinking, as we played the game that day, that this was not the best
storyline we had ever used. The plot we'd chosen (and all agreed to) prevented
Sarah and Chelsea from being part of the play for a long time. They mostly just
hung out in a corner of the basement (the jail tent, I guess), not really part
of the story. I remember being annoyed when they tried to escape once or twice
(this was NOT the storyline we had all agreed to!). Seth and I wanted to be
realistic about the length of time it would take for sworn enemies to become
lovers, so we took our time, role-played a long series of evening bonfires,
over which the conversation-based tale of us changing our minds took place.
After many such bonfires, Seth looked at me and said, in a ridiculous accent,
"You like her, don't you?"

At about the time that I myself started thinking that this session was getting
rather long, Chelsea and Sarah started openly complaining. They were bored. But
get this: This offended Seth and I! We were offended that they were bored. Did
they really expect us to rush the story and make it proceed unnaturally?? This
was a story about _us_, the white male victors, and they were supposed to abide
our dull storytelling with _grace_.

-----

My understanding of Poe's Law: without a clear expression of intent, there will
always be people who confuse satire for sincerity (and vice versa). As a
teenager, I was often on the idiotic side of this maxim. One such incident:

Ben Folds wrote a [fantastic satirical song], mocking angsty suburban white-kid
bands like Limp Bizkit. The fact that this was an obvious satire was lost on me
and my friend group, perhaps because none of us had never seen the music video.
Most embarrassingly, several of the lines of the song really resonated with us,
including the main one. "Yeah!" we said to each other, "people really don't
know how hard it is to be male, middle class, and white!" And, "Yeah! Slavery
wasn't MY idea, so lay off, everyone!"

  [fantastic satirical song]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=34u_3Z9_LUw

-----

Baby lions observe their parents hunting, and mimic those actions with each
other in play. As they get older, their playing starts to look more and more
like real hunting. Until it is real hunting.

Baby humans play the same way, basically. We observe the adults around us,
whether our parents or on TV, and we play "House" or "Cops & Robbers" or
"Cowboys & Indians". We practice, essentially, living in the roles we've
observed.

I was never explicitly taught that my narrative, as a white cis male, was more
important than anyone else's. But looking back on that incident, playing
Cowboys and Indians, it's very clear to me that I'd picked up on that idea. And
I'd internalized it to the point that, as a teenager, I missed the joke in a
blatantly satirical song, totally blind to my own privilege.

While the lie that my narrative matters more than others' was absorbed
subconsciously, internalizing the corrective truth has been an altogether
intentional exercise. One that has already taken years; one that will take the
rest of my life. I began this unlearning probably about eight years ago, when I
became quite enthralled with the narrative of the fabulous [Lisa Yoder]. She
has been a wonderful and patient guide. May we all show kindness and patience
to those just starting down this unlearning trail.

  [Lisa Yoder]: http://blog.lisa-yoder.com/

It's awful to think but doubtlessly true that people who are not white or male
learn the same lesson in our culture: That the white male narrative is the main
story arc, and everyone else plays a supporting role.

_It's not true._ I mean, that's obvious, right? We all learned at some point
that, crazy as it seems, there are other people who are just as real as
ourselves. And their stories are just as complex and important as ours.

Unfortunately, I doubt that everyone believes that their stories are just as
important as anyone else's. And for me, being in the privileged, "mine is the
main narrative" position, it's sometimes difficult to notice when I'm behaving
in an unsavory way—a way rooted in a subconscious belief that my narrative is
the main one that everyone else is interested in.

So I'd like to encourage everyone in a couple of ways:

Hey fellow white dudes: Learn to accept this as a possibility: you may
(accidentally, subconsciously) approach the world as if your experience is more
important than others' experiences. (Maybe you somehow don't do this, but I
find that unlikely.) After you've got that down, accept criticism with grace.
Actually invite criticism. Because we _need_ criticism. Since this is a
subconscious attitude, we're going to accidentally fall into the patterns we
practiced as children. When others point out that you're behaving in an
unsavory way, apologize. With a for-real apology, not "I'm sorry you feel that
way." And really try to not do it anymore. It takes patience, humility, and
introspection.

Hey everyone else: The world needs your perspective. Everyone (including white
dudes) benefits from an abundance of perspectives. Share, even if it doesn't
feel natural. Share your narrative with us. Yours is not a supporting role.
Yours is another main narrative.

Let's all help each other unlearn.
