date: 3 March 2012

# Passive Thought Broadcasts for the Networked Brain (Forward-Thinking Patent no. 2,361,222,505)

If I had 20 kilodollars, I would patent this up like WHOA. In 50
years when other people create it: happy lawsuits for all. And thus I
would attain the highest morality: to make one's shareholders filthy
rich.

But I don't have 20 kilodollars.

And so I post it here, on the open interweb, for you. So that if _you_,
dear reader, have 20 kilodollars, you can get a patent. And I can be
your shareholder.

## Product Description

Brainphones. No more must we chop our lung-wind with clumsy tongues to
make words to be packaged back into thought by a listener's ear. We can
send the original content directly, thought-to-thought.

But brainphones have limitations. They are strictly peer-to-peer, so
that all participants must opt-in to the thoughtshare. As decided in
[FILL IN COURT CASE THAT WILL OUTLAW INVOLUNTARY THOUGHT BROADCASTS],
broadcasting thoughts to customers, protesters, ravers, etc without
consent is immoral.

We believe that our product, Passive Thoughtcasts&trade;, will increase
the unprecedented good that has resulted from brainphones, without
crossing into the murky water of non-consenual thoughtcasting.

As a use-case of our product, imagine a world with no turn signals. Can
you imagine a poorer way to communicate than the turn signal? Instead of
flipping a lever to let nearby drivers know that I might, if the signal
isn't accidental, make a turn of unspecified angle at one of the
possible locations ahead of me, imagine this: using Passive Thoughtcast™
technology, I let everyone know **precisely** where I plan to turn. But,
unlike previous thoughtcasting technology which cluttered the mindspace
of everyone in brainshot, the benefit of Passive Thoughtcasting&trade;
is that only people who might be affected by the information are
notified. If you happen to be in a car travelling in that direction, or
a child looking out the back window of a station wagon, or a squirrel
preparing to cross the side-street onto which my car will turn, _then_
you will be notified. Sleepers in nearby houses need not have their
dreams cluttered with your "I'm turning!" thoughtcast. If I've passed
the turn already and am heading safely away from you, I need not be
bothered.

We believe that Passive Thoughtcasts&trade; will build on the phenomenal
success of peer-to-peer thoughtshare technology. We look forward to
building a more productive and efficient society with our shareholders.
