Date: 2012-07-28

# Remember To Press Record

This past Tuesday, I started teaching a course on Web Devolopment to
people who consider themselves non-technical and "not computer people".
My course is called [Hello Interweb][hello].

The first class went really well! We had six people there in person, and
I fired up a [Google+ Hangout][g+] for [the friend][davey] who couldn't
make the drive.

And I had a grand plan for this G+ Hangout: I would record it! You can
do a "Hangout on Air", and the Hangout is recorded to
[YouTube][youtube]. This would be great, I thought! Then people who
didn't make it to the class in person would at least be able to catch up
on it afterward.

But managing in-person participants is hard enough; trying to juggle a
G+ Hangout along with it was crazy. [The friend][davey] agreed. He
couldn't hear much.

So I had a second class, entirely within a G+ Hangout, today. And it was
great! Three people joined, and were surprised to learn they were being
recorded but agreed to it and made the material super fun to go through.
We created a wonderful learning material together!

---

A quick aside:

I remember holding video cameras when I was young, watching the world
through a black & white peep hole (and later through a tiny color
screen). "Are you filming me?" people would ask. And if they didn't know
about the little red light, then you could tell them you weren't, even
if you were. Because all that separated _hard documentation_ from
_faulty memories_ was a small red button.

---

Just because you're holding a camera doesn't mean it's recording.

You might have to teach that to a child in a less-developed country, as
you teach them to operate this incredible new technology, this
incredible new opportunity in their hands.

And in the more-developed world, we all need to be taught simple lessons
like that all the time. Because we're holding so many new opportunities
for the first time ourselves.

It turns out that a Hangout On Air is _not_ on air by default. You must
press the small red "Start Broadcast" button (in the top right).

So alas! The wonderful class! The participants wore pirate hats and
scuba gear and tiaras to act out [the play][play], but you cannot see
it! We were so proud of our performances, but our performances are
forever only lowly ours; they will grow wavy like old glass and turn to
dust with our neurons.

(Remember wavy glass? We're a dying breed.)

Don't worry, though, gentle reader. Though Week 1 would have been the
best class to watch later, we'll capture Week 2 for sure. I know about
the button now.

And next time I teach the course, I'll be sure to capture Week 1 down in
a medium that moth & rust do not destroy. It'll be safe & sound on
[YouTube][youtube]'s immortal servers, preserved better than any
yearbook for my grandchildren.

  [hello]: http://hellointerweb.com/
  [g+]: https://plus.google.com/hangouts
  [davey]: http://vimeo.com/daveyrockwell
  [youtube]: http://www.youtube.com/
  [play]: http://hellointerweb.com/the-script
